---
description: Migration guide for upgrading to Foundry v1.0 with breaking changes, deprecated features, and updated best practices.
---

## Foundry v1.0 migration guide

Several breaking changes were introduced in Foundry `v1.0` version, which could require updates on projects using older versions.
This guide documents the suggested best practices when migrating from an older version.

- [Foundry v1.0 migration guide](#foundry-v10-migration-guide)
  - [Solc optimizer disabled by default](#solc-optimizer-disabled-by-default)
  - [Expect revert cheatcode disabled on internal calls by default](#expect-revert-cheatcode-disabled-on-internal-calls-by-default)
  - [Removed support for testFail tests](#removed-support-for-testfail-tests)
  - [Removed support for legacy console.sol signatures](#removed-support-for-legacy-consolesol-signatures)
  - [Conflicting remappings are ignored](#conflicting-remappings-are-ignored)
  - [Artifacts not persisted on `forge coverage`](#artifacts-not-persisted-on-forge-coverage)
  - [Other](#other)

### Solc optimizer disabled by default

Enabling optimizer by default could introduce bugs for seemingly correct code (if there are bugs in optimizer itself) - see [#2486](https://github.com/foundry-rs/foundry/issues/2486). Foundry `v1.0` default settings could affect current projects by reporting higher contract sizes and / or project build failures. It is recommended to explicitly enable optimizer and their runs in `foundry.toml` configuration:

```toml
optimizer = true
optimizer_runs = 200
```

> ℹ️ **Note**
>
> Projects using additional compiler profiles with optimizer runs but without explicitly enable optimizer could fail to build with `Missing profile satisfying settings restrictions` message.

See: [optimizer configuration](/config/reference/solidity-compiler#optimizer)

### Expect revert cheatcode disabled on internal calls by default

When testing internal functions with `vm.expectRevert` cheatcode at the same call depth only the first `vm.expectRevert` is executed - see [#3437](https://github.com/foundry-rs/foundry/issues/3437). In Foundry `v1.0` default settings this behavior is disabled by default. This could affect current projects by reporting test failures as `[FAIL: call didn't revert at a lower depth than cheatcode call depth]`. It is recommended to review these failing tests and either enable revert on internal calls or rewrite tests to avoid this.  
For example, a test like the one below:

```solidity
contract ContractTest is Test {
    error CustomError();

    function revertWithCustomError() internal {
        revert CustomError();
    }

    function testExample() public {
        vm.expectRevert();
        revertWithCustomError();
    }
}
```

can be changed to use a mock `CustomContract` that expose a public function:

```solidity
contract CustomContract {
    error CustomError();

    function revertWithCustomError() external {
        revert CustomError();
    }
}

contract ContractTest is Test {
    CustomContract internal c;

    function setUp() public {
        c = new CustomContract();
    }

    function testExample() public {
        vm.expectRevert();
        c.revertWithCustomError();
    }
}
```

or configured to allow expect reverts:

```solidity
    /// forge-config: default.allow_internal_expect_revert = true
    function testExample() public {
        vm.expectRevert();
        revertWithCustomError();
    }
```

See: [`vm.expectRevert`](/reference/cheatcodes/expect-revert#error) cheatcode

### Removed support for testFail tests

The `testFail` test prefix support is removed in Foundry `v1.0` in order to prevent confusion - see [#4437](https://github.com/foundry-rs/foundry/issues/4437). This could affect existing projects by reporting test failures where they're not expected. Existing `testFail` tests can be migrated for `v1.0` by using `vm.expectRevert()` cheatcode or by using a `try/catch` approach and assert the failure.  
For example, a test like the one below:

```solidity
function testFail_IncrementAsNotOwner() public {
    vm.prank(address(0));
    upOnly.increment();
}
```

can be rewritten as

```solidity
function test_RevertWhen_CallerIsNotOwner() public {
    vm.expectRevert(Unauthorized.selector);
    vm.prank(address(0));
    upOnly.increment();
}
```

### Removed support for legacy console.sol signatures

Foundry `v1.0` removes the support for `console.sol` selectors that use the faulty ABI encoding - see [#8910](https://github.com/foundry-rs/foundry/issues/8910). This could affect existing projects by producing test build failures, therefore they need to be updated accordingly. For example:

```solidity
console.log("testMisc", 42);
console.log(0);
```

should be rewritten as

```solidity
console.log("testMisc", uint256(42));
console.log(uint256(0));
console.logUint(0);
```

> ℹ️ **Note**
>
> Latest `forge-std` version should be used in order to use the newly signatures for console logging and avoid unexpected behaviour.

### Conflicting remappings are ignored

Prior to Foundry `v1.0`, `forge` inferred remappings by taking into account remappings of sub-projects. When conflicting remappings were present, the longest / most specified had the priority. This was dangerous, as adding sub-projects were able to completely change the code that is executed, even if the remappings of the root project are not changed - see [#8910](https://github.com/foundry-rs/foundry/issues/9146).
With `v1.0`, a project will fail to build if the same remapping

```toml
@openzeppelin/=lib/openzeppelin-contracts/contracts/
```

is defined in both root project and in an imported dependency.
To fix it, the project root remapping should be added in `src` context:

```toml
src:@openzeppelin/=lib/openzeppelin-contracts/contracts/
```

### Artifacts not persisted on `forge coverage`

In prior versions, `forge coverage` was changing the artifacts (which are unoptimized in order to provide accurate source hit maps) without any warnings. This was confusing and was leading to undesired situations like the one in [#8840 comment](https://github.com/foundry-rs/foundry/issues/8840#issuecomment-2390792012). Foundry `v1.0` does not generate artifacts when running coverage anymore hence projects should be aware of the change.

### Other

- `FORGE_SNAPSHOT_CHECK` requires boolean value. Use `FORGE_SNAPSHOT_CHECK=true|false`.
- `forge inspect --pretty` flag was removed. Use `forge inspect` for table view.
- `forge bind --ethers` was removed. Use `forge bind` (defaults to `alloy`).
- `forge debug` subcommand was removed. Use `forge test --debug` and `forge script --debug`.
- `cast etherscan-source` subcommand was replaced with `cast source`. Use additional `explorer_url` and `explorer_api_url` args for alternative block explorers.
- `foundryup` installs stable if no version specified. Use `foundryup -i nightly` to install nightly versions.
